📘 Coin Change Problem using Greedy, Dynamic Programming & Hybrid Approach
1. Abstract

The Coin Change Problem is a classic optimization problem in computer science that focuses on finding the minimum number of coins required to make a given amount using a set of coin denominations.

This project implements three different approaches — Greedy, Dynamic Programming (DP), and a Hybrid approach — to compare their efficiency and correctness. While the Greedy method provides faster solutions, it may fail to produce optimal results for certain inputs. Dynamic Programming guarantees optimality but at a higher computational cost.

The Hybrid approach combines the advantages of both methods to ensure correctness while maintaining efficiency. The project also includes an interactive visualization tool to enhance understanding.

2. Introduction

Optimization problems are fundamental in algorithm design, and the Coin Change Problem is one of the most widely studied examples. It has real-world applications in areas such as financial systems, vending machines, and resource allocation.

This project demonstrates how different algorithmic strategies behave under the same problem conditions. It highlights the importance of choosing the right approach depending on constraints like time complexity and correctness.

3. Problem Statement

Given:

A set of coin denominations
A target amount

Determine:

The minimum number of coins required to make the target amount
Challenges:
Greedy does not always give optimal results
Brute force is inefficient
Need for a balance between speed and accuracy

4. Objectives
To implement the Coin Change Problem in C++
To compare Greedy and Dynamic Programming approaches
To design a Hybrid approach for optimal performance
To provide input validation for robustness
To visualize the solution using a web interface

5. Proposed System

The system performs the following steps:

Accept user input (coin denominations and target amount)
Validate the input
Apply:
Greedy Algorithm
Dynamic Programming
Hybrid Approach
Display results for comparison
Provide visualization through a browser interface

6. Methodology

The project follows a structured approach:

Input collection
Input validation
Sorting of coin denominations
Execution of algorithms
Comparison of results
Output display

7. System Architecture
User Input → Validation → Algorithm Execution → Result Comparison → Output Display

8. Project Implementation
📁 Project Files
File	Description
coin_code.cpp	Main C++ source file with input validation
coin_change.html	Interactive browser visualizer
README.md	Documentation file
🚀 Compile & Run (Windows PowerShell)
Step 1 — Compile
g++ coin_code.cpp -o coin_code.exe
Step 2 — Run
.\coin_code.exe

⚠️ Always use .\coin_code.exe in PowerShell.

🖥️ Sample Run
Enter number of coin denominations: 3
Enter 3 coin denominations (space separated): 1 3 4
Enter target amount: 6

Coins : 1 3 4
Amount: 6

Greedy result : 2 coins
DP     result : 2 coins
Hybrid result : 2 coins
⌨️ Input Rules
Rule	✅ Correct	❌ Wrong
Separate coins with spaces	1 3 4	1,3,4
Enter count as single number	3	2,3
Only positive integers	1 5 10	-1 0 5
Amount must be non-negative	6	-2

9. Algorithms Used
1. Greedy Algorithm

Selects the largest denomination first and continues until the amount becomes zero.

Sort coins in descending order
Pick largest coin ≤ amount
Repeat until amount = 0

Limitation: Does not guarantee optimal solution.

2. Dynamic Programming (DP)

Uses a bottom-up approach to compute the minimum coins required.

dp[0] = 0
For each amount:
    dp[i] = min(dp[i], dp[i - coin] + 1)

✔ Always produces optimal result

3. Hybrid Approach

Combines Greedy and DP:

hybrid = min(greedy_result, dp_result)

✔ Ensures correctness
✔ Improves efficiency

⏱️ Time & Space Complexity
Algorithm	Time Complexity	Space Complexity	Optimal
Greedy	O(n log n + n·A)	O(1)	No
DP	O(n·A)	O(A)	Yes
Hybrid	O(n·A)	O(A)	Yes
🔢 DP Table Example

Input: Coins = {1, 3, 4}, Amount = 6

Amount	0	1	2	3	4	5	6
Min Coins	0	1	2	1	1	2	2

Traceback:
6 → 3 → 3 → 0

Final Answer: 2 coins

10. Features
Input validation (no crashes)
Multiple algorithm comparison
Optimal solution guarantee
Interactive visualization
Easy-to-understand output

11. Advantages
Demonstrates algorithm efficiency clearly
Helps in learning optimization techniques
Practical implementation of DP
User-friendly design

12. Applications
Currency systems
Vending machines
ATM software
Resource optimization problems

13. Limitations
DP uses extra memory
Greedy fails for non-standard coin systems
Performance depends on input size

14. Future Scope
Add more algorithms (Backtracking, BFS)
Improve UI visualization
Extend to multi-currency systems
Convert into mobile/web application

15. Conclusion

This project successfully demonstrates different approaches to solving the Coin Change Problem. While the Greedy method is fast, it is not always reliable. Dynamic Programming ensures correctness, and the Hybrid approach combines both advantages.

The project provides both theoretical understanding and practical implementation, making it a valuable learning tool for algorithm design.
